Welcome to Cloud Native Compass,
a podcast to help you navigate the vast
landscape of the cloud native ecosystem.
We're your hosts. I'm David Flanagan, a technology
magpie that can't stop playing with new shiny
things. I'm Laura Santa Maria, a forever learner
who is constantly breaking production.
Do you want a single database to store
high precision,
multidimensional
time series data that supports infinite
cardinality?
Well, we're not there yet, but Poladex does
share his vision and roadmap for InfluxDB three.
Do you wanna hear David not have to
talk about Rust to get a guest to
actually talk about Rust? Now is your chance.
In all seriousness, we not only get to
talk about a move from Go to Rust,
also about observability
and how it's changed over time, as well
as a little bit about open source licensing
changes.
So let's Rust. I mean, Go. No.
But, really, let's all Rust.
Alright. Thank you for joining us, Paul. And
for anyone who's not aware, can you please
tell us a little bit more about you
and what you're up to?
Yeah. So I'm Paul Dix. I'm the cofounder
and current CTO of InfluxDB.
We are the company that make InfluxDB,
which is an open source time series database.
It's useful in use cases like, tracking system
metrics and application performance metrics,
sensor data,
that kind of stuff.
My background is as a programmer. I started
the company
in 02/2012,
and we went through Y Combinator actually under
a different idea, and then we pivoted to
this idea in the fall of twenty thirteen.
Awesome. Yes. Okay. There there's more. There I
I can go on, like, at length,
but I'm trying to trying to be concise.
It's a fair enough to get it. Yeah.
Alright. Well, let's talk about your work on
InfluxDB.
So
over the last, I'm not sure how many
years, you started work on a rewrite of
Influx, moving towards using Rust on a project
called IOX,
which I believe this year,
you have now pushed out into production as
part of your InfluxDB cloud offering.
So I really wanted to kinda drill into
that and just understand more about, one, why
a rewrite,
change in programming language, rearchitecting
the system,
using Apache Ato,
a huge
task for a company to take on, and
I'd love to know more.
Yeah. So I'll just start with the obvious,
which is a rewrite is basically, like, the
worst possible thing you can do. Like, unless
you're just, like, a sadist or a glutton
for pain,
you could should avoid a rewrite at all
costs. Okay. That's out of the way.
So InfluxDB,
the original version is written in Go.
And the core architecture of the database is
built around what I would call, like, a
clever hack. Right? So it's essentially, it's kind
of like two databases in one thing.
One is basically a time series database that
organizes data on disk,
as individual time series, which are value time
stamp pairs in time ascending order. Right? So
as all the data comes in, it tries
to organize that data on disk in that
format, which is basically like a very, like,
indexed format.
The other piece of this
is an inverted index
that maps metadata
to individual time series. So the metadata is
like a measurement name, a tag key value
pair, a field name. So just like
you know, usually, people are familiar with inverted
indexes is from document search where you have
a document. You have an inverted index of
the words that appear in the document. And
then when you search,
you find the words and you find the
documents that have those words. Right? In this
case, we say, oh, tag key value pair.
Like, host equals, you know, server a or
region equals US West.
And then you find the time series that
match that piece of metadata.
Right? So
what that means is as you're ingesting all
the data, there's a lot of indexing work
that happens. Right? So it churn chews through,
like, a lot of CPUs and stuff like
that, and it reorganizes the data. Now
when a query comes in, if the query
is for one individual series,
generally, queries are very, very fast. Right? This
is a system that's optimized for that kind
of query workload and for that kind of,
like, needle in a haystack
query,
specifically on, you know, the, you know, the
individual series and the time range that you're
looking for.
But, again, like, the the problem becomes as
your index,
the set of metadata that you're tracking grows,
commonly referred to as, like, the cardinality problem.
Right? The number of unique tag values
that occur. The actual just the number of
individual series that occur,
you spend more and more time indexing the
data, and it just becomes more and more
expensive
to ingest it. Right? You spend more CPUs.
You spend more disk space storing the index
and, like, all this other stuff. It becomes
really painful,
particularly as you try to add, like, more
and more granularity and visibility,
like, more precision into the measurements that you're
taking. Right? Like, again, more kind of metadata
that you're capturing around those things.
And then the other side of this is
when you want to do a query,
if you have a query that's gonna touch,
you know, tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands,
or even millions of individual
time series,
right, you wanna do an aggregation
across,
you know, all these time series in a
region or whatever and compute something.
Those queries become prohibitively expensive.
And oftentimes,
you're like, you can't even do them because
the engine will just, like, fall over. Right?
You just it the the way to do
it and to map it onto that index
structure is just way, way too expensive.
So,
basically, that's the version of the database written
in Go, version one, version two, same storage
engine we created. We're like, we wrote a
storage engine from scratch that kind of has
this architecture.
And
over you know, we created the initial version
of that storage engine in,
oh,
I lost my screen for a second. I
flew over there.
We created the initial version of that storage
engine
in I mean, I prototyped it in the
fall of twenty fifteen, and then we had
the first release in early twenty sixteen that
had that.
And we've iterated on it and added to
it over time.
And,
essentially, what we found over, you know, the
next whatever number of years,
four years,
is that
people wanted to have higher cardinality data. They
wanted to feed in data where they actually
didn't have to worry about the cardinality or
the femorality of the values that they were
feeding in, and they wanted to do more
analytical queries across it. Right? And all of
this stuff was built around our query language,
InfluxQL,
which is a query language that looks kind
of like SQL. So it's kind of, like
it's kind of familiar and friendly, but it's
for people who really know SQL, it can
be frustrating
in
unique ways because it doesn't actually work exactly
like SQL.
But for some things, it's like, it's super
easy to create, like, a time series query
or whatever. So, again, like, there are multiple
problems we were trying to solve for. How
do we solve this cardinality problem?
How do we give people a query engine
that can be useful for analytical style queries
on larger
chunks of data?
And then this other piece, which was
we needed to figure out how to store
a massive amount of data at a much
more cost effective way. Right? InfluxDB one and
two have just a base level of assumption
that you have a, you know, a locally
attached SSD
or, you know, whatever, like an EBS volume,
a high performance network volume with provisioned IOPS
and whatever. And all of your data is
stored on that, and it's super expensive.
And for a lot of our use cases,
right, people could have a year's worth of
data,
but 99%
of their queries hit basically the the trailing,
like, few hours or a few days worth
of data. Right? But they they want this
stuff available and accessible,
but they don't need it available accessible,
you know, at the same response times, and
they definitely don't need it, like, stored on
expensive NVMe drives or whatever. Right? So
we needed to figure out a way to
decouple the compute of ingestion and query from
the actual storage of the data. Right? And,
obviously, like,
all this stuff is, like, building up over
the course of, like, you know, 2017,
'20 '18 is when I'm noticing this.
2019,
it's just becoming more apparent. And the thing
is, also, during this time,
there are interesting things happening out there in
the infrastructure world. Right? The rise of Kubernetes,
for example, wasn't there when,
when we first created InfluxDB.
So this idea of, like, containerized applications and,
like, this ephemeral
application stack or ephemeral compute stack that you
layer on, and then the other thing, the
rise of object storage
as basically, like, a common storage layer.
Those things happened over the course of, you
know, that decade
of, you know, the the tens,
the February.
And I think
one company that really took advantage of that,
at least the the rise of, like, object
storage and decoupled compute from storage was Snowflake.
Right? They're the first company that I think
that really commercialized
this idea of we can create this big
data system
that stores data super cheaply and just layers
on compute on demand to execute queries on
it. Now Snowflake is obviously designed for a
completely different use case than InfluxDB.
Right? Snowflake is a data warehouse,
big data at scale, whatever. InfluxDB is about
operational data and real time. Right? You need
to be able to query it within, you
know, milliseconds of it writing it into the
database, and you need those queries to return
generally
sub second so that you can build monitoring
learning systems on it. You can build build
real time dashboarding.
So
in 2019,
I saw actually, like, in the fall of
twenty eighteen is when I started picking up
Rust.
And I thought, like, again, like, I first
commit on InfluxDB was in 2013,
but the basis technology that we built for
it was actually we had done and started
in the fall of twenty twelve. And Rust
was not a place where I would use
it then. I used Go because I thought
we will be able to move faster creating
the database if we use Go as a
language.
But in 2018, I started picking up Rust
and thinking, okay. This is actually interesting.
And then in the fall of twenty nineteen
is when the async await stuff landed in
Rust. And when that landed, I thought, okay.
This is probably gonna be, like, a very
a serious language for building server side software
where you have to handle network requests and,
like, all this other kind of stuff. Right?
That was, I think for me, that was,
like, the final, like, piece that I was
looking for, that Rust was had actually arrived
at a point where you where
you you could use it to build a
complicated piece of server software, you wouldn't have
to build everything yourself. Right? There are certainly
successful projects in Rust that started before that.
Right? Like, did
that.
But,
that point, I was like, okay. That's interesting.
So coming into the beginning of twenty twenty,
which is when I kicked off this project,
you know, I just said, okay.
We need a different database architecture. This combination
of this inverted index plus this time series
storage and the way the entire database engine
works is not gonna work for
how for the for for what we wanna
build, for the requirements we wanna meet. Right?
Like, we're using, like, memory mapped files, which
is like, again, you're not gonna get that
in object storage, and it's not great to
use in containers and, like, all this other
stuff. So I was like, okay. If we're
gonna rearchitect the entire database,
that's basically a rewrite of the database. We
could do it in Go and the you
know, there there's a bunch of stuff that
exists in Go that we would reuse that
obviously wouldn't be rewritten,
the the
language parser and, like, all this other stuff.
But, basically, like, I I was looking at
the project, and I thought, this is a
rewrite. Like, if we if we actually try
to do make these big changes.
And,
again, in, like, late twenty nineteen, early '20
'20,
'1 of the other things I noticed out
there in the world was,
Apache Arrow. Like, I'd known about the project
for a little while. Apache Arrow is like
an in memory columnar format specification.
And I was looking at that, and I
was looking at Apache Parquet, which is, you
know, file format for this kind of structured
analytical data.
And I thought, well, there's I think there's
really something interesting here. So, again, like, I
wrote, like, some blog post in, like, early
twenty twenty where I said, like, I thought
that
the
different pieces of the Apache Arrow project
would become,
like,
a way for companies that are building
data warehousing systems, a big data systems, a
streaming data systems, basically, like, all these, like,
analytical systems that are working on
observational data of any kind, right, whether it's
server monitoring data or sensor data or whatever,
those standards would become a way for people
to collaborate and build,
you know, common infrastructure, but also proprietary solutions.
And those will be, like, the touch points
in terms of, like, how you exchange data
between these systems.
So that was kind of the thesis in
early twenty twenty.
Rust as a language is gonna be better
because,
one, like, the the multithreading support in Rust,
think, is just the way it handles it
is is way, way better, right, because it's
kind of enforced by the compiler.
We wanted strict control over how memory is
managed and and that kind of stuff, which
obviously, like, basically, we didn't want a garbage
collected language.
Performance was gonna be a critical thing. Like,
go super fast. Don't get me wrong. I
love it as a language. It's way easier
to learn and work with than Rust, I
think, in my personal opinion.
But
I just thought for this kind of software,
for, you know, database system that has to
perform at scale and with high performance,
like, Rust just seems like the logical choice.
And if it wasn't Rust, it would be,
like, c plus plus. But,
I think in this day and age,
it would be it's just a better choice
to use Rust.
Yeah. And then, yeah, and then over the
course of the next, you know, three and
a half years, like, initially, we it was
basically, like, me and one other guy within
Influx
for a couple of months, and then we
hired somebody else,
Andrew, who's still with us.
And these are the three of us kind
of treated as a research project almost for
the first, like, six months. It wasn't like
I wasn't I within the company, there's no
way I was gonna get, like, people to
buy off on, oh, Paul wants to rewrite
the database. Like, yeah, let's put a bunch
of effort into that.
No. It was basically like, I'm gonna do
this as a research project because I think
it's interesting,
and I'm gonna see where it leads. And
then by November
of twenty twenty,
we like, we've had enough of the pieces
figured out. Right? We're gonna use Apache Arrow.
We're gonna use Parquet as the persistence format.
Object storage is where all the data is
gonna live.
Apache Arrow Flight was gonna be the RPC
mechanism that has since evolved into FlightSQL,
which is a new standard they have for
essentially making,
doing RPC and SQL queries,
in these kind of data systems,
and,
a project called,
Apache Data Fusion. Right now, it's a subproject
of Apache Arrow.
Its Data Fusion is a SQL
parser, planner,
optimizer, and execution engine written in Rust.
And we're like,
at that point in, you know, the summer
of twenty twenty when we decided to build
around these things,
you know, data fusion wasn't even close to
as far along as it is now. And
we knew,
we knew that we'd be, like, investing significant
effort. Like, we actually
looked at using other SQL engines as the
core of the database. We looked at some
c plus plus engines just to think,
like, you know, may we didn't wanna write
our own.
But Right. We needed something that was, like,
optimized for our use case for time series.
And we saw that regardless of what we
picked up, we would end up having to
do do a lot of work, and we'd
almost, know, have to take partial ownership of
the project.
And
we thought this umbrella of projects under Apache,
under the Apache Foundation, under Arrow,
were
you know, they were they were early, but
they were promising. And if we really put
our effort behind it, it would cause more
people to
also
start programming against it and whatever. So in
November of twenty twenty, I announced, hey.
Working on a new core of the database.
It's called IOX because nobody was comfortable with
me calling it InfluxDB3.o.
Because, again, they're like,
you're not gonna rewrite the database. So there's
no way we're doing this. So I was
like, well, we'll we'll just let's just see
how it goes.
So
but, yeah, at that point, I announced it,
and still it was, like, three of us
working on it. It was still very, very
early stage, but that
allowed us to it got, you know, a
number of people out there in the world
interested in the project, and we hired some
great people that joined us so that by
March of twenty twenty one,
you know, we had a team of, I
think, nine people.
And we spent years
writing a database,
which we launched into production earlier this year.
So how long did it take before you
were allowed to call it three point o
before people stopped telling you, no. You can't
rewrite this database.
I mean, we we announced publicly that it
was, InfluxDB3.0
on April twenty sixth
of this year. So
inside the company, it took you, like, two
or three years to get everybody on board
with the idea of, no. Really, we did,
and we're about to
finish it.
By I would say by
by probably,
I mean,
it's basically by, I'd say,
2021,
like, summer, fall of '20 '20 '1,
people within the company are like, okay. We
need this, like, new core database engine because,
like, at that stage, it was obvious what
the limitations of the previous engine were.
Right? In the beginning, people are like, Paul,
what are you talking about? Like, you know,
there were some people who who got it
intrinsically,
and other people are like, we don't need
to do this right now. And then by,
again, like I said, like, the fall of
twenty twenty one, everybody in the company is
like, okay. We definitely need this new database
engine. When's it gonna be ready? And I'm
like, guys, you
know, we're we're not baking a key share.
Like, it's gonna take some time.
Yeah.
So
so yeah. By and then by, I'd say,
like, the spring of twenty twenty two,
it was like, okay. This is this is
obviously what we need to be doing. And
then definitely by the fall of twenty twenty
two, it's like, okay. We're getting everybody focused
on this
new database engine, and we're gonna call it
3.o.
Then it just became a question of when
when we were gonna be more public about
the fact that it was 3.o. But in
my mind,
it was always InfluxDB three dot o.
Even though it is a total rewrite and
the database architecture is
drastically different than
the the underlying database architecture of one and
two.
Alright.
Nice. I love that we just ask a
question and then set you loose, and then
you you
just go for it. Sorry. Yeah. Go for
it. No. Don't be sorry. That's the good
part. It's fine. Well, I don't know if
there should be more back and forth.
No. No. No. That was absolutely perfect. And,
you know, you kind of answered my second
question, which is good as well because we're
thinking through the the problems faced well here.
I think there's a lot of context about
what happened in the industry, what happened with
the early versions of Influx, why this rewrite
was required, why Rust, why Arrow, all these
things now make a lot more sense. Right?
But Mhmm. You know, let's reemphasize one of
those things you talked about with the twenty
tens. It's like this was the decade where
containers and cloud took off. Right? People were
using the femoral compute,
spinning up VMs on AWS,
GCP,
Azure, launching dozens to hundreds to thousands of
containers orchestrated with Kubernetes,
and all of these have their own signals.
They have their own logs. They have their
own metrics. They have their own traces. Traces
are now important because at the same time
of this wild cloud container
orchestration evolution,
people decided to start doing microservices because the
technology enabled all these new architectures too.
So
I spend a lot of my time I'm
just gonna, like, set context and not ask
questions and then just let you infer the
questions. But still, I spent a lot of
my time working with companies that are trying
to build up platforms. You know? They want
to make it easier for their developers to
deploy to production. And I think one of
the challenges I've seen is that people really
struggle with, I need a database for logs.
I need a database for tracing. I need
a database for my metrics. I then need
to aggregate the inquiry and all this stuff.
And they make it really complicated
for what is in essence all the same
data structure. I don't think there's that much
difference from a metric or trace in the
log. It's all a collection of events. The
difference between a trace and a metric is
the is an aggregation of some raw level
event. And the challenge has always been the
cost of storing it at the super high
dimensionality
the the super high dimensions versus the easiness
of querying that, which is why we probably
do metrics and
terrible versions of histograms and all this other
stuff that we now accept as the norm.
Right?
Yeah. Does and I'm gonna quote something on
your website that you may hate me for.
Right? But when we talk about IOCs and
d b three, you you specifically say infinite
cardinality.
Yeah. So the question is, does IOX give
us or can it or InfluxDB three, sorry,
give us a single store for all of
these signals, all of this observability and monitoring
data?
And
can you give us a bit more insight
into what that infinite cardinality actually means on
a practical
term.
Yeah. So
to store the data, yes,
three dot o can store all of that
kinds kind of data, right,
because of the the fact that cardinality doesn't
matter. The problem becomes
happens when you try to query that data?
Pulling it out. Right? And that's basically, like,
the
the patterns for how you query the data
and what people expect
are why you end up with, you know,
I I I think,
why you end up with three different systems
for for storing each of those kinds of
data. Right? Traces, metrics, and logs.
In my mind, they're all just, like, different
views of the same thing. Ultimately, like,
if you wanted to, you could just have
traces and skip the logs and metrics.
Right? You can infer you could derive
everything else from raw traces. Because traces, again,
like, you could have just a blob string
field in the trace
that has log info.
Right? So but the problem
is
the problems are, like, what happens at scale.
Right? And when you start generating a ton
of this data, do you end up having
to sample it?
And then how do you actually access the
data? What are the access patterns? Right? So
for right now,
you know, the
the metric access patterns are like, I have
this metric, and I wanna look at it.
And the idea behind metrics is you're actually
metrics are a summary view of some underlying
distribution or some underlying thing that you're tracking.
Generally, metrics are not the raw high precision
view. Right? For example,
if you want the
average response time in one minute intervals
to an API call, right, the specific, like,
API endpoint. Right?
Now the raw view is individual
requests.
Right? And you log every
bit of detail you would want on that
request. Right? What host received the request,
what user submitted it, what token they were
using, what endpoint,
the actual data included in the request, the
response time,
the response itself. Right? You could you can
get
down to just an insane level of precision.
But the problem is to do that at
scale is completely unreasonable. Right? Generates, like, more
data than you ever even stored
and all this other stuff. So you end
up creating these systems to summarize things.
And the problem that people frequently run into
is like, well, if you didn't think ahead
of time of what you needed to summarize,
when you go to look at the summaries,
your metrics,
the answer you need isn't there, and the
the requests already happen. Mhmm. Right? So logs
are a way to capture more detail and
then kind of, like, try to figure it
out
after the fact. Right? So the idea with
logs is it's
it's something where, you know, you're doing an
ad hoc investigation
where you're not continuously, like, looking for some
signal that triggers, like,
a a problem in the system. But
so,
ultimately, like, storing all that data, you can
use the same format. Parquet is a storage
format, for example, could store all that kind
of data, but
querying it effectively and efficiently is difficult. And
that usually requires
either secondary indexing structures or other ways to
organize the data so that you can actually
query it effectively. Now,
aspirationally,
three dot o wants to be
the home for all that kind of data.
Basically, for any kind of observational data you
can think of. Right? And, like, for us,
it's not just, like,
you know, the server infrastructure monitoring use cases,
but also more and more sensor data use
cases.
And, again, with sensors, you find the same
kind of thing. Right? People
can deploy more sensors in their environment for
the machines they're tracking or the environments they're
tracking, but that they can also increase
the precision of the measurements. Right? They can
increase the sampling interval.
They can increase
the precision in terms of what gets tracked
with each measurement that gets created.
Right? And that's all the metadata that you
could potentially track about something. The sensors, you
could be, again, like, all the stuff around
the customers or the users. It could be
around the location,
the, you know, the lat long, like, all
that other kind of stuff.
So
getting there like, we're there in terms of
being able to store it. We're not there
in terms of being able to query it.
We organize data into large chunks,
and then the query engine just kind of
brute forces those chunks.
So
I think
the it's yeah. That that is gonna take
some time to get to the stage where
we can actually do all those things. I
think
there's some other stuff around, like, with logs
and tracing use cases where the schemas are
very, very dynamic, and they're not always consistent.
Right? If you try to, like, pull out
structured fields from these things, a lot of
times people won't have the same field types
for something that's named the same thing because
they're in different services or whatever. So those
are all just, like, kind of,
like,
weird
They're fun. Yeah. Infrastruct like, horrible, like, problems
that you just end up having to deal
with.
So whereas, like, right now, I would say
with 3. O, it's better for, like, structured
events, right, where you have events that you're
tracking
and you wanna get high
high precision data,
right, where you can slice and dice it
or any way you choose. Right? So systems
where you can think of, like, use cases
where you think that'd be good is, like,
if you're doing usage tracking and an API,
audit logging,
any type of individual
events.
Metrics is also a use case, obviously, that
InfluxDB is used for, and this engine is
useful for as well.
But logs and traces are a bit trickier
because of the
again, like, kinda how flexible the schemas are
as people deploy them in different systems.
And the thing with tracing that's weird is
all the like, I think most of the
tracing front ends
look at, like, you're looking at a metric
view or a log view, and it's like,
oh, go look at the trace. So, basically,
what you're doing is you're jumping off to
look for a trace by a trace ID,
right,
which is
a essentially, that implies what you want is
an index which maps an ID to an
an individual trace.
And, of course,
time series database isn't really designed to do
that, or, like, the way our database is
structured is not really designed to do that.
Now there are ways
ideas we have for being able to layer
that in without having to create
super expensive secondary indexing structures, but, all of
that stuff is gonna take time.
So
I think with with tracing, it may would
would make it easier is
when you have a trace ID, you basically
always have a a time range as well.
So for a system that stores traces at
scale, it would be easier to say, like,
oh, give me this give me the this
trace ID, but this is, like, the time
envelope that it appears in.
At least that's what I'm imagining make it
easier. But
yeah.
I don't know. Yeah.
Metrics, logs, and traces is basically, like, the
gold standard for how you do observability right
now, but I don't think
I don't think that's the end state. I
think it's not ideal.
Like, the usability isn't ideal.
It can be painful.
Tracing is super like,
tracing is expensive from a development perspective in
terms of putting it into your code, but
it's also expensive in terms of, like, an
infrastructure and, like, being able collect all this
data. And then you get into, like, figuring
out, okay. Do we need to do sampling
because there's too much? And
I don't know. It's all still too difficult
to use, which tells me there's a lot
of room for for innovation. But the thing
is there are a lot of really smart
people trying to fix these problems.
It's just really hard because of the, like,
volume of data keeps increasing,
and the demands of the user base
also keep increasing.
Right?
Yeah. I used to work at a logging
company and back
around the same time when you were discussing
how do we move this off to other
things.
And
I remember that being part of the discussion
that we were handling petabytes of data and
how do you handle just that much.
But I I find it interesting if you
do do you end up with a lot
of legacy systems as well? Because that was
always the issue with the logging is that
to go back and change it from the
string
that who knows what the developer decided to
put in there, if they've decided to put
anything in there. And then there's all these
different levels of logs, and they're all strings
that you have to figure out how to
parse.
Then eventually, people move to structured logging, but
that wasn't a thing.
So
that's a whole another can of worms to
open, I imagine.
Yeah. I mean, you you then you have
to either, like, parse the legacy logs into
some sort of structure.
Right? I mean, I and, again, like, the
structure is really about
query performance. Right? Because you don't you could
Right. You could create the structure on the
fly. Right? You could just store all the
logs and whatever and basically, like,
at query time, parse each log line in
in the structure. And, again, like, you could
do this on the fly to be like,
oh, well, that query didn't work, but I
got this error back.
So I'll change my the way I'm structured.
I'm trying to parse that particular line or
whatever.
But the problem is that
those queries are super expensive to run. Right?
They cost a lot of CPU. They cost
a lot of network bandwidth.
So, really, like, the thing about
structured logs and even metrics is about essentially
introducing structure and summarizations
that make the queries
efficient enough to run for whatever the use
case is. And I think that's also one
of the thing to keep in mind is,
like, is this a case where you're building
for,
an a system that does automation where it
needs, like, the query to return in,
you know, tens of milliseconds, hundreds of milliseconds?
Is it something where it's like
and that the, you know, the automated systems
generally are like, those queries run all the
time, right, many, many, many times. Right? Or
is it
an ad hoc query
from a user who's doing some investigation,
in which case they're more than willing to
wait tens of seconds for a return.
And those queries are few and far between.
Right? You're not doing that many of them.
And I think
the
I think the ad hoc thing is is
probably easier to solve with
that pattern of
let's take these blobs of data, put them
into object storage,
and spin up compute on the fly
to handle those.
It's the it's the it's the real time
systems
where you have to really think about
layering in structure and optimizations that you can
answer the queries fast enough.
Alright.
So
you mentioned at the start how
you had this InfluxQL
in version one. This SQL
SQL like language that frustrated people because it
wasn't
real SQL that they were familiar with working
with other databases.
With data fusion, do people get access to
more traditional
SQL?
That's part one of the question. Part two
is with InfluxDB two, there was a lot
of investment into the Flux language
with the messaging around how Flux was the
purpose built for time series and SQL wasn't.
I'm curious if that has changed, and do
we feel now that SQL is the right
language for time series, or is there still
a future for Flux within FluxDB three?
Yeah. So, first, I'll I'll mention about InfluxQL.
So some people found it frustrating because it
was unlike SQL, but a surprising number of
people have told us they actually prefer InfluxQL
to SQL
for writing some basic time series queries. Right?
Because it's just, like, super easy to write
a thing where you're, you know, getting a
summarization by these, you know, different,
things. Whereas, like, in a SQL engine, you
might have to deal with windowing functions and
partitioning and, like, all this other stuff.
So
I think
InfluxQL
has a place
that will continue
will continue to serve just because we've gotten
that feedback that a number of people actually
prefer it to SQL. So with Data Fusion,
we have a fully featured SQL engine that
supports all of these things, joins, window functions,
partitioning, like, this all this complex
SQL stuff.
We've been adding in more and more functions
to make time series stuff,
to make it more capable of doing, like,
time series specific style queries,
and we'll continue to do that. We're certainly
not done with that.
So
the thing with
three dot o is, again, it's built around
this Data Fusion
query engine, which is a SQL engine.
Now
all that's written in Rust.
Obviously, two dot o is written in Go,
and Flux
as a language
was we developed for two dot o. And
we developed it,
so there were a couple of things. One,
for the users of InfluxDB one, they frequently
had requests that they just wanted to express
more arbitrary and complex logic in their queries,
than could be expressed in InfluxQL
or indeed in in SQL. So we're just
like, we need
essentially, like, we need, like, a scripting language
paired with a query language
so that people could do more complex things.
And it became like, oh, you can use
this also to connect to third party systems,
to join with your time series data on
the fly, or to send data out to
third party systems, right, be it another
database or a third party API or whatever.
Right? So that was that
was part of it. Another part of it
was
I had a thesis back in whatever. Like,
I mean, I originally, in the fall of
twenty fourteen, I was talking about changing
language from InfluxQL to potentially something that looked
more like a functional language,
which is what Flux is.
And I decided at that time to stay
with InfluxQL.
But I I had a theory that, like,
oh, I think the for the time series
use case, a functional language would be better,
would be more, like, expressive and more powerful
for
working with time series data.
And Flux
was our attempt at that. Right? And,
I think
so we built, obviously, the Flux language, the
scripting language, the query engine, the planner, the
optimizer, everything from the ground up, which is
a very large
like, that's basically, like, two very large separate
projects.
So,
and all of that is written in Go.
Now
coming to three dot o,
we thought, okay. We need a way to
to bridge Flux, and we also wanna see
if we can bring over InfluxQL.
And within FluxQL, we had the idea, well,
it looks like SQL. So what we what
we can probably do is write a parser
in Rust to parse the language, which isn't
too hard to create,
that will then translate
an InfluxQL query into a data fusion query
plan. Right? So we had,
one person start on that in the summer
of last year.
And, basically, now, you know, this year, we
have that actually works, and it works really,
really well. Right? Because and it was basically
just one person who did a lot of
that effort. Last fall, we added on additional
people onto the team to build the last,
like, bit, which is, like, API bridge,
which is, you know, to represent all of
that with the InfluxDB one query API.
So we're really happy we were able to
bring that over,
and it gets all the benefits of that
data fusion query engine. Right? So when there
there are performance optimizations
or other things like that, they just come
they when we pull that in, InfluxQL
gets all of that for free.
Now with Flux,
what we tried to do
was, like, the it was, like, the surface
area of it is way, way too large
to try and, like, create it again in
Rust,
although I would love to do that.
It's just it's just, like, way way too
big of a project to do, and we
don't we don't have the the time or
resources to do it. So what we did
was,
in our cloud two platform,
we had, you know, Flux
processes
that communicated
with the old TSM storage engine via this
gRPC API.
So what we did was in in three
dot o, we created that gRPC
API,
and we connected Flux up to it. And
what we found through,
like, some production mirroring and actually letting customers
test it was, one, that gRPC API was,
like, kinda it had some edge cases that
were poorly specified.
So there were weird bugs that would pop
up that we just unforeseen
bugs, like, that would surface in the Flux
query, things that worked on the previous one
that don't work on this.
But more importantly,
the performance of that bridge
was not good. Right? It basically, there were
there were queries that will work in the
old Flux to TSM version that worked in
a decent amount of time
and queries
on the Flux to three dot o bridge
that just, like, timed out. And,
again, like, one of the things we're trying
to do with three dot o, 1 of
the reasons we adopted this new query engine
is because we wanted queries to be super,
super fast. Right? Query performance was a super
important thing,
and a lot of Flux queries, like, we
saw there were queries that just wouldn't work
in that engine.
So when we created this bridge,
because of the way that API works, it's
literally it's built around
how data is organized in that TSM storage
engine.
And the three dot o engine does not
have the same organization.
So in order to present
the data in that organization,
the three dot o engine has to do
a lot of, like, post hoc sorting
and filtering.
And that that sorting is basically you
chew up CPU time doing that. And,
basically, the it wasn't performance. So,
like, right now, we have a a theory
that
there would be a way to update the
Flux engine so that it uses the three
dot o native API, which is basically FlightSQL,
and that that the Flux engine could do
the work itself
to reorder the data in the way it
expects it to be ordered. And maybe that
would be performing enough.
But for the time being, we're not focused
on that. We're still focused on
the core query engine, which means InfluxQL
and SQL,
and adding
capabilities and performance to it that that like,
right now, it's already faster than one dot
o at a number of queries, but there's
still some queries that's definitely not faster with.
And we want to improve those situations
and spend our our time on that for
now
and then see, you know, see later, what
we can do with Flux. We are
people in the community have expressed interest in
actually self organizing
to do that work. So we've actually created
a separate community fork of Flux,
that we're gonna be pointing people to.
And
that fork will be a place where people
can collaborate on this idea
without
the thing is we can't do it in
our primary branch because we run this in
production, in our cloud environment.
It's just too difficult to try and, like,
pull these changes in as people like, we
need to give people the ability to, like,
iterate on their own without having to go
through our production pipeline.
So that's the idea is in three dot
o,
InfluxQL and SQL are native and supported.
Flux, we're still trying to figure out.
What we I mean, I will say a
separate thing about Flux, which is maybe not
obvious to people.
Or, for some people, maybe it is. But,
the language is highly polarizing.
It's a new language, and a lot of
people are like, I don't wanna learn your
stupid language.
And I get that.
I did not
really get that
six years ago, but I get it now.
And
so there's basically, what we found is that
a lot of people just didn't wanna pick
up the language. They wanted to work with
something they already know. And, again, with InfluxQL,
it's a different language, but the thing is
it looks like SQL. It feels
it feels like an old friend. Like, you
you know it.
So you can pick it up without having
to do too many things.
But with Flux, it was a serious,
adoption blocker for a lot of people.
But then on the other side of this,
there is a slice of people who took
the time to learn Flux,
and they absolutely love it because they can
do things in that language
that they could not do in SQL or
in InfluxQL.
And I think that is kind of a
testament to the, like, the reason why we
built the language because we wanted something that
enabled arbitrary
processing
inside the core of the database.
So,
again, it's like one of those things where
depending on who you are and how you
look at it, Flux is either, like, a
great thing, and it's like, we need to
keep pushing this forward, or it's
why these guys build this language just doesn't
make any sense.
It's it's tricky.
Alright. Awesome. Thank you. Did you have a
question, Laura?
No. No.
Just random commentary.
Yeah. We're running out of time very fast
here, so let's finish up with something a
bit a bit different. Recently,
HashiCorp announced their license change to the best
the Bustle license.
And you posted some thoughts on Twitter saying
that it kinda gave you a better pause
for thought on what source available in open
source
is or the future.
And I'd love for you just to talk
about that and maybe even bring it into
the context of what's the future for the
license on InfluxDB
three.
Yeah. So
so I basically, in my mind, open source,
the
the the bustle, the community licenses, all those
things, those are not open source. Those are
basically
the new version of
shareware or commercial freemium software. Right? It's commercial
software.
And if you and frequently,
they will offer
that software to you to use for free
under certain conditions.
And if you are one of the people
who meet those conditions, maybe you're happy and
you'll be able to use it. Right? Tons
of people continue to use MongoDB,
the SSPL version. Tons of people use Elastic
still after they change their license, Redis,
Confluence. Like, they're you know, literally every single
infrastructure open source
creator has changed their license over the last
six years. Like, the I there isn't one
I can think of who hasn't,
except for us, maybe.
So,
and I I totally get the motivations to
do that. But in my mind, like, open
source, I actually don't like copy left licenses.
I like AGPL, GPL. I don't consider them
to be real open source. To me, open
source is really about freedom, freedom to do
what I want with that code.
And if you put any sort of restriction
on it, which a copyleft license
does have restrictions on it, then that's,
you know, restricting my freedom.
To me, open source is about freedom. So
and, again, like, I think for a company
that's producing open source code,
you have to be okay with the fact
that people are going to do anything with
that code, including up to and including competing
with you.
And if you are not okay with that,
you should not be putting that code out
as open source because that is what's going
on.
Right? And, generally,
the best thing for a company to do
that's building products and stuff like that is
to only put open source code in something
that they wish to have,
become a commodity.
Right? So the operating system the server operating
system that your, you know, your your servers
run on, you want that to be a
commodity. Many times, want the database to be
a commodity. You want these these core infrastructure
components
that are essentially not part of the value
that you deliver to your customers.
Essentially, you want them to be commodity so
you don't have to pay a lot extra
for those things. Right? You want the price
of those things to be driven down as
low as possible.
But if you are a vendor,
the thing you sell, you don't want that
to be a commodity. You want to be
able to sell it for the highest possible
price.
And
the so the the problem that
vendors have that create a project where their
primary monetization path is essentially that project plus
something
or whatever. It becomes like, well, we're putting
all this effort into the open source thing,
and a bunch of people are using it
for free. And there are a bunch of
freeloaders, and there are a bunch of, like,
competitors who are taking our stuff.
And then they decide to change the license.
And the the problem I have
with so there there are multiple pieces to
this. One is,
as the creator of a project,
if I want it to get the broadest
possible adoption,
I want more people to use it.
I'm incentivized to have that project be permissively
licensed. Right? Get all thing all other all
else being equal,
a developer or user looking at a piece
of software.
Literally, if everything else is the same and
the difference is a commercial license or a
permissive
Apache or MIT license, they're going to pick
the permissive one. Right? There's no reason not
to because you get a bunch of other
stuff.
So they choose that.
But the problem now
that I think the HashiCorp thing kind of
highlights
is it's just yet another vendor
in a long list of vendors over the
last six years who've changed their licenses.
And now, basically, it's causing a a lot
of distrust
in the developer community because they see, like,
oh, here's a new open source project, and
they look like, is that project by a
VC backed company, right, or VC backed startup?
If it is, they're gonna be like, well,
it's an open source project. Yeah. But I
don't believe that it's gonna continue to be
open source, which is a totally valid thing
to think
given
how things have been going over the last
six years.
So,
you know, previously, again, my thesis, if you
want broadest pop possible adoption,
put it in a permissive license.
That
idea is kind of getting damaged by the
fact that people keep changing their license from
permissive to something commercial.
Right?
And I
don't know if there's a solution to that.
I do think
separately, I think that that
HashiCorp
probably made an error here. Like, the thing
is
the license change only protects forward commits. Right?
You can't retroactively change a license. They so
they could have just as easily
put all their development effort into a closed
source private fork
and then made
the open source piece
a downstream,
you know, dependency of that closed source fork,
and then not tell anybody about it. Right?
Just be like, yeah. We're just gonna do
this or whatever. Or conversely, they could have
just said, we're gonna donate this thing into
a foundation, but all of our developers are
gonna be working on this closed source thing.
Right?
The effects
would have been the same in terms of
the end outcome, right, because you have this
open Terraform fork.
But the difference in
everybody's perception of HashiCorp as a company would
have been dramatically different.
Right? The the the business and commercial effect
would have been exactly the same, which is
all their r and d, all their development
tokens are going only into the commercial software,
which is fine. That is their right. If
they want to do that, they should totally
do that. And it's also fine if they
wanna change their license.
That is totally permissible.
Right? There's no just because you create something
open source one time
doesn't mean you owe it to the world
to continue for the rest of your life
to put more and more into it. Right?
But I think there were more graceful ways
to handle it that could have delivered
the same business outcome for them at the
very least.
Alright. Let's extend that question by one sentence
and just say, like, does the fear
that people have now and rightly so about
single vendor VC backed open source projects not
always being open source,
Does that mean that InfluxDB three could be
an Apache foundation project in the future, or
are you not worried about the perception or
the fear of people adopting it because it's
a VC backed single vendor project?
So
I do not think we will put InfluxDB
three into a foundation.
My goal is to have a permissible license
project.
But the truth is, like, I don't the
problem with foundation projects is the the bar
is usually too high. Like, InfluxDB doesn't meet
the bar for most foundations.
Right? There aren't multiple companies
contributing to InfluxDB's,
you know, version one, two, or three. Right?
We're the ones developing it alone.
So it doesn't really hit
the level of a foundation.
Terraform, you certainly could have put it into
a foundation. I'm certain a number of foundations
would have taken it gladly
as a as a project, as a top
level project. But InfluxDB doesn't
hit that. It's not it's not on the
same level in terms of
the contribution and, like, all this other stuff.
There's that.
I mean, I think
I I I don't know. Like, for broadly
for the
for the community and building trust with people
and stuff like that,
I don't know if there's a solution. Right?
I think the license itself matters because if
it's Apache two or MIT,
then, you know, people can
do whatever they want with that software
for all time as long for for that
point.
But maybe there's a model where you can
commit to,
you know,
transitioning into open governance over some period of
time. I think early on
in a project, open governance is actually more
of a hindrance than,
you know, a benefit because you you want,
like, a small
tight knit group of people that are driving
the project forward.
But yeah. I don't know. It's tricky.
There are so many things I wanna say
and argue about here, but I know we're
out of time.
I I think the one the one thing,
I guess, I I will say is the
one little challenge, and I'll I'll just kinda
leave it here, I guess.
Red Hat tried the
we're gonna switch the order of things and
make the downstream the open source part.
And I would argue that the community really
doesn't like that.
So I don't know. There there's a lot
of different ways. I admit that I am
a huge fan of the AGPL v three,
but maybe that's why
I
I will argue it. But we unfortunately don't
have time, and I want to really badly.
To be continued.
To be continued. That's correct.
Yeah. We could have an entire session on
open source licensing. I could talk about that
for, like, hours. Dude, this this should be
so much fun.
Anyway
Yeah. Well, we don't wanna keep you any
longer. So feel free to give us thirty
seconds if you wish just to tell people
where they can learn more about Influx, follow
you on Twitter, anything like that. Feel free
to shamelessly plug in if you wish.
On Twitter, I'm at politics.Influx
or InfluxData.com
or InfluxDB.com.
You can find us.
3.o, we have available,
as a multi tenant cloud product, as a
dedicated cloud product. And soon,
open source builds or builds of 3.0 will
be available,
but we're not again, we're focused on our
commercial offerings at the moment for obvious reasons.
But,
yeah. Alright. Thank you very much. Thanks for
joining us. If you wanna keep up with
us, consider subscribing to the podcast on your
favorite podcasting app or even go to cloudnativecompass.fm.
And if you want us to talk with
someone specific or cover a specific topic,
reach out to us on any social media
platform. Until next time when exploring the cloud
native landscape
on 3. On 3. 1,
2,
3.
Forget your compass. Don't forget your compass.